PRODDOCS-813: doc function (#8940)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/doc.md

---
title: "About the doc function"
sidebar_label: "doc"
id: "doc"

> description: "Use `doc()` to reference docs blocks in description fields."

Reviewer: Making it clear that the docs() goes into the description field:
```suggestion
description: "Use `doc()` in description fields to reference docs blocks."
```

---

> The `doc()` Jinja function is analogous to `ref()` and is used to look up a named docs block (for example, `{% docs orders %} ... {% enddocs %}`) and return its rendered content. This lets you reuse documentation text in `schema.yml` description fields (and other Jinja-enabled descriptions). For more information, refer to the [Documentation guide](/docs/explore/build-and-view-your-docs).

Reviewer: I think what's missing here is explaining you need to use a docs block to identify the text that's being reused. We should also mention restrictions on where it's used.  
```suggestion
You can specify documentation text in a docs block, then use the `doc()` Jinja function in description fields as a way to reuse the same text in multiple places. You can only use the `doc()` Jinja function in properties YAML files for resources with description properties, for example, models, model columns, sources, source tables, source columns, and so on.

The `doc()` Jinja function, which is analogous to `ref()`, looks up the named docs block (for example, `{% docs orders %} ... {% enddocs %}` in a `docs.md` file) and returns its rendered content. For more information, refer to the [Documentation guide](/docs/explore/build-and-view-your-docs).
```

## Usage

> In dbt, column descriptions are typically defined inline in a model’s `schema.yml` file. These descriptions are written as plain text and are associated directly with a specific column.

Reviewer: Using "schema" is vague for new users. We've started to use "properties YAML file" with specific examples like `models/orders.yml`
```suggestion
In dbt, column descriptions can be defined directly in a model’s properties YAML file. These descriptions are written as plain text and are associated with a specific column.
```

> ### Hardcoded column description

Reviewer: Hard coded is a bit jargon-y
```suggestion
### Properties YAML file descriptions
```

This example shows how a column description is defined directly in the `schema.yml`:

> <File name="models/schema.yml">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<File name="models/orders.yml">
```

```yaml
models:

>   - name: my_first_dbt_model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: orders
```

    columns:

>       - name: id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - name: order_total_cents
```

>         description: "The primary key for this table"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        description: "Total order amount in cents."
```

```

</File>

> When you run `dbt docs generate` and view the docs site, this text appears exactly as written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run `dbt docs generate` and view the docs site, this text appears exactly as written but only for the `order_total_cents` column of the `orders` model.
```

### Reusing documentation with doc()

To avoid repeating the same description across multiple models or columns, dbt lets you define documentation separately and reference it using the `doc()` function.

With this approach, documentation is written once in a markdown file using a named docs block, and then reused wherever needed in your project. This helps ensure consistency and makes it easier to maintain shared definitions over time.

> First, define a reusable documentation block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, define a reusable documentation block in a `docs.md`:
```

<File name="models/docs.md">

```
{% docs customer_id %}
A reusable customer identifier.
{% enddocs %}
```

</File>

> This creates a named piece of documentation (`customer_id`) that dbt can reference elsewhere.

Reviewer: This is awkwardly phrased. Can you reword it to match my descriptions above?

> Next, reference this documentation in your `schema.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, reference this documentation in your properties YAML file:
```

> <File name="models/schema.yml">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<File name="models/orders.yml">
```

```yaml
models:
  - name: my_first_dbt_model
    columns:
      - name: id
        description: "{{ doc('customer_id') }}"
```

</File>
When you run `dbt docs generate`, dbt resolves the `doc()` reference by looking up the corresponding docs block and injecting its content into the generated documentation.

> As a result, the column description in the Docs UI will display the text defined in the markdown file, rather than inline YAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the column description displays the text defined in the markdown file, rather than inline YAML.
```

### Duplicate docs block names

Docs block names must be unique within your project. If you define multiple `{% docs ... %}` blocks with the same name, dbt can’t reliably decide which block to render when you call `doc('DOCS_BLOCK_NAME')`.

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.11" lastVersion="1.99">

> In <Constant name="core" /> v1.11 and later, duplicate docs blocks are not allowed. dbt raises a compilation error to prevent ambiguous `doc()` references.

Reviewer: can you make sure this wording matches my edits above?

<File name="models/docs/example.md">

```
{% docs customer_id %}
A reusable customer identifier.
{% enddocs %}

{% docs customer_id %}
A different definition for customer id.
{% enddocs %}
```

</File>

> ```shell

Reviewer: Did you test this in Core v1.11 or higher?

dbt parse
13:23:41  Running with dbt=1.11.7
13:23:41  Registered adapter: duckdb=1.10.1
13:23:41  Encountered an error:
Compilation Error
  dbt found two docs with the name "customer_id".
  Since these resources have the same name, dbt will be unable to find the correct resource
  when looking for doc("customer_id").
  To fix this, change the name of one of these resources:
  - doc.doc_test.customer_id (models/docs/example.md)
  - doc.doc_test.customer_id (models/docs/example.md)
```

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock firstVersion="2.0">

In the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />, duplicate docs block names are not allowed. If duplicates are found, dbt reports the conflicting files. Rename one block so each docs block name is unique. For more information, refer to [Stricter evaluation of duplicate docs blocks](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/upgrading-to-fusion?version=2.0#stricter-evaluation-of-duplicate-docs-blocks).

> <File name="models/docs/example.md">

Reviewer: You should use the same name in example as error message:
```suggestion
<File name="models/docs/crm/business_class_marketing.md">
```

```
{% docs docs_block_title %}
A reusable customer identifier.
{% enddocs %}

> {% docs docs_block_title %}

Reviewer: I'm confused. The error message below is talking about two different files 'models/crm/_crm.md'  and 'models/docs/crm/business_class_marketing.md' but these two docs blocks are in the same file. 

I would just see test what the error message actually looks like for this code example.

---
title: "About the doc function"
sidebar_label: "doc"
id: "doc"
description: "Use `doc()` in description fields to reference docs blocks."
---
 

> You can specify documentation text in a docs block, then use the `doc()` Jinja function in description fields as a way to reuse the same text in multiple places. You can only use the `doc()` Jinja function in properties YAML files for resources with description properties, for example, models, model columns, sources, source tables, source columns, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify documentation text in a docs block, then use the `doc()` Jinja function in description fields as a way to reuse the same text in multiple places. You can only use the `doc()` Jinja function in properties YAML files for resources with description properties. For example, models, model columns, sources, source tables, source columns, and so on.
```

 
The `doc()` Jinja function, which is analogous to `ref()`, looks up the named docs block (for example, `{% docs orders %} ... {% enddocs %}` in a `docs.md` file) and returns its rendered content. For more information, refer to the [Documentation guide](/docs/explore/build-and-view-your-docs).
 
## Usage
 
In dbt, column descriptions can be defined directly in a model's properties YAML file. These descriptions are written as plain text and are associated with a specific column.
 

> ### Properties YAML file descriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manually adding descriptions
```

 
<File name="models/orders.yml">
 
```yaml
models:
  - name: orders
    columns:
      - name: order_total_cents
        description: "Total order amount in cents. This value is always a positive integer and excludes taxes and shipping."
```
 
</File>
 
When you run `dbt docs generate` and view the docs site, this text appears exactly as written but only for the `order_total_cents` column of the `orders` model.
 

> ### Reusing documentation with doc()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reusing descriptions with doc()
```

 
With this approach, documentation is written once in a markdown file using a named docs block, and then reused wherever needed in your project. This helps ensure consistency and makes it easier to maintain shared definitions over time.
 
First, define a reusable documentation block in a `docs.md`:
 
<File name="models/docs/example.md">
 
```
{% docs order_total_cents %}
Total order amount in cents. This value is always a positive integer and excludes taxes and shipping.
{% enddocs %}
```
 
</File>
 
This defines a docs block named `order_total_cents`. Reference it with `doc('order_total_cents')` in description fields wherever you need the same text.
 
Next, reference this documentation in your properties YAML file:
 
<File name="models/orders.yml">
 
```yaml
models:
  - name: orders
    columns:
      - name: order_total_cents
        description: "{{ doc('order_total_cents') }}"
```
 
</File>
 
When you run `dbt docs generate`, dbt resolves the `doc()` reference by looking up the corresponding docs block and injecting its content into the generated documentation.
 
As a result, the column description displays the text defined in the markdown file, rather than inline YAML.
 

> ## Duplicate docs block names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Avoid duplicate names
```

---

You can specify documentation text in a docs block, then use the `doc()` Jinja function in description fields as a way to reuse the same text in multiple places. You can only use the `doc()` Jinja function in properties YAML files for resources with description properties, for example, models, model columns, sources, source tables, source columns, and so on.

The `doc()` Jinja function, which is analogous to `ref()`, looks up the named docs block (for example, `{% docs orders %} ... {% enddocs %}` in a `docs.md` file) and returns its rendered content. For more information, refer to the [Documentation guide](/docs/explore/build-and-view-your-docs).

## Usage

In dbt, column descriptions can be defined directly in a model’s properties YAML file. These descriptions are written as plain text and are associated with a specific column.

### Properties YAML file descriptions

This example shows how a column description is defined directly in a properties YAML file:

<File name="models/orders.yml">

```yaml
models:
  - name: orders
    columns:
      - name: order_total_cents
        description: "Total order amount in cents."
```

</File>

> When you run `dbt docs generate` and view the docs site, this text appears exactly as written but only for the `order_total_cents` column of the `orders` model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When you run `dbt docs generate` and view the docs site, this text appears exactly as written but only for the `order_total_cents` column of the `orders` model.
```
